as well as banking products and services to Brazos Valley citizens.
Thanks for joining us on another edition of Veterans of the Valley.
He was born in Idaho and he lived in Michigan.
And he was attending Michigan State University when they heard someplace called Pearl Harbor had been attacked.
He didn't even know where Pearl Harbor was, but he did just about what every other able-bodied young man did.
He enlisted, thinking the war would be over before he got there.
Little did he know.
Veterans of the Valley welcomes Bill Pope to today's show.
Bill, thank you for joining us.
Glad to be here.
What was it like when you heard Pearl Harbor was bombed and you enlisted?
Take us from that point.
It was sort of confusion as far as the people were concerned.
As you say, they were aware that we were in Hawaii, but they had no other idea what was happening.
And then, of course, the way it was handled.
was the thing that really excited a lot of people to settle up this thing and get it straight.
And so there were a lot of heroes that came out of this, a lot of heroes that weren't known about and didn't receive the plaudits that perhaps they should.
Right.
It was more or less a war that pretty much changed the face of our country.
That's right.
And the livelihood of it and so forth.
But take us through your training.
Where all did you go real quick for training?
Well, we all looked around, you know, for the one that we thought would be the most damaging to the enemy.
There were things like the Merchant Marine.
The Marine Corps was one of the ones that everybody enjoyed, was proud of.
The Army was kind of down the list, but that's where many of them showed up.
And the Air Corps, most of us didn't believe that we could enter the Corps, that we were good enough, both physically and otherwise.
And so consequently, when my roommate said, let's go down to Lansing and see if we can get in the Air Corps, I kind of shrugged it off.
And what turned out was that he didn't make it, and I did.
So we started out.
So then we were put in another world that we hadn't realized, but one that I think did a lot for veterans as much as what they did for the others.
And you were all of 20, 21 at that time?
21, yeah.
Ready to try everything, you know, that came along.
You had the tiger by the tail, more or less.
You were ready to go at it.
And of course, we were a little puzzled by what they did at the beginning.
They took our group and put them clear down in Florida.
In fact, in Miami for a while, as a kind of a stockpile of cadets that they could use.
And then after that, went up to Pennsylvania to a junior college there, still as a group, still a long way from piloting a plane.
and then finally went back to San Antonio, and then finally after that went north.
So one thing we could never understand about the Army was their logic and moving these things around.
Constantly moving them around, huh?
That's right.
Tell us, you have an interesting story about some flight training.
I believe it was on May 13th of 43.
Was that the right date?
Maybe 12th?
Well, yeah, I had several bouts of them, you might say.
When we were there near Clarion College near Pittsburgh, they gave us our first rides in airplanes.
I'd never been in one before and on.
These were Piper Cubs, and you really get a sensation of flying in a Piper Cub.
That's the old stick type.
So as we were going out one day with this fellow, a storm came up, and he had to land that thing through a couple of trees.
It just about took us off.
So I began to see that there were some hazards as far as flying was concerned.
But it gets in your blood.
Absolutely.
Tell us about, you have a quick little story about basically Lake Worth.
And a lot of people around here won't know that, but obviously it made the Fort Worth Star-Telegram from a long time ago.
This was the most unusual thing.
This was in the latter part of our training mission.
We were flying B-24s at that particular time.
We left for the evening to do some night work.
They wanted us to do a lot of flying at night.
We got up northeast of Dallas and Fort Worth in that quadrant area up there and started back.
They had the instructor pilot and the other student pilot and myself, and we also had an engineer that went with us, which is required because they wanted somebody to do the plane and so forth.
We came down in on the east side of what is Fort Worth now, and of course everything was still lit up at that particular time.
And since the other student pilot had done the takeoff, it was up to me to land it.
and so we were doing the flying then.
We made a circle around the south side of Fort Worth and made the base leg that would put us across where the runway should be.
More or less like the approach?
Yeah, well lighted at that time.
And so I made the turn and was then going kind of across where the runway would be
And we had some flaps down in the wing, and we had our gear down.
So all of the things moved hydraulically were dropped down.
And so I made the turn and lined up with a runway, which is perfectly set as far as I was concerned.
What was your altitude about now?
Well, we were probably only about a couple thousand feet at that time.
We were going to lose right into the runway itself.
and I felt this kind of tug on the controls and that wasn't unusual because sometime the instructor pilot would pull an engine on you to get you used to that sort of thing.
See how you reacted in situations.
And so when that happened I wasn't too concerned but I know that he was and he was in the other seat and I looked through his window and there was flames coming out of the engine.
That was a number three engine, which is right up against the fuselage on the right.
On the co-pilot side.
Yeah, and one of the real problems of that, Carl, is that that is the engine that has the hydraulic system.
Oh, okay.
And so of all four, if you didn't want an engine to go out, number three was the one that you wanted to do the last.
So I realized then that we were in trouble, and we had our gear down and our flaps down, and we had no hydraulic way to handle anything.
So you also had a lot of drag because you had flaps down and gears down.
And this, we were over Lake Worth at that time, which is just on the west side of Fort Worth.
So we were moving around in a circle there, and the controls were getting awful mushy, and the airspeed was really dropping down.
And then all of a sudden, the instructor pilot said, this is it.
So he pretty much knew something just from your airspeed dropping.
Yeah, I knew something was going to come up.
We had to get the flaps and gear on if we were going to land.
But I'll say in a minute that may have been the worst thing we could have done was to have landed.
We were out over the water at that time in this lake and all of a sudden you could feel the plane dropping.
And that's the last thing I knew.
And the next thing I knew... And it dropped from what, about 1500 feet, 1200 feet?
We must have been at least 1000 feet.
We were letting down at that time.
That's pretty far away.
That's right.
So we were then in a real pickle at that time.
We were over this lake and we'd lost our airspeed and we were stalled out.
And that's the last that I remember.
And the next thing I remember was that I was sitting in my seat in the water up to my waist.
Wow, down below.
And you're just so dulled at that time, you don't know what the situation might be, but you knew it was a serious thing, but you're still alive, whole thing.
I remember underbuckling my belt and standing up in the water about to my waist, and there was a plane up ahead of me, rolled up on its back, the two landing gear floating straight up,
and the pictures they have in the paper is exactly what I saw on that.
So I started to wade ashore and there was a lot of debris all scattered through the lake and I was wading, kind of winding myself along and yelled for help and suddenly lights came on and the cottages that were near that shore
And I got close to the bank and a couple of arms went down and dragged me up out of the water and so forth.
So you crashed pretty close to shore right next to a cottage developer.
That's right.
In fact, the wing of one of our planes went right through a building right up above where a fellow was sleeping in the cottage.
Goodness.
And as I say, the rest of it was just completely crumpled up and so forth.
The plane was on its back.
It was just like you'd taken it and just tortured it.
And actually one service man did lose his life, but three of you survived that fall from a thousand feet.
Alvin Powell was the engineer.
And I think that he was down in the bomb bay trying to get an auxiliary pump going so we'd have some hydraulic pressure.
So he was doing his duty.
He was from Portland.
and he was the one that lost his life.
I found out that also the other pilot, a student pilot, was thrown clear on down on the beach and lived, and also the instructor pilot, believe it or not, was thrown on top of a house.
because I remember walking by and seeing him sitting on top of the house and I thought this is a crazy thing.
But then by that time the lights had come on and of course they knew back at the base that we'd had trouble and so they sent a couple ambulances out to get us and load us up and take us out on the thing.
So you've been through an ordeal like that and basically you just have to keep going.
That's right.
That's right, yeah.
They couldn't believe when they picked me up that I didn't have some internal injury.
And I know they got me back to the base there and I took every x-ray they could make and so forth.
The only thing was that my ankle was a little bit scarred and I had a cut above my eye.
And that's the only two things that I had at that time.
After falling from, what, a thousand feet or so in a B-24.
So it's incredible that it ever got out.
And I've often thought that you look back on it
If we would have made the runway, as soon as that slipstream was gone, that place would have blown up.
And if we'd have landed farther out in the lake, the B-24, you enter in through the bomb bay.
Right, on the belly side.
Yeah, which would already be underwater.
And if you'd gone farther toward the land, you'd not only put yourself out, but you'd have had tremendous fire and so forth when the fluid.
You could have gone into that cottage complex instead of into the edge of the water.
So when you look back at it, and I've done it a thousand times, there was no other way that you could have got out of that plane.
That has to be one in a million or one in an astronomical amount.
It must be on that.
It was all unplanned.
It was one of those things.
Those things happened in warfare to fellows that were on the front lines, you know, and so forth.
So that was quite an experience, and that was right before we checked out our crews and got ready to go across sea.
Okay.
So where did you go to build your crew?
Well, we went to...
first up to there at Fort Worth and on up into Nebraska, and they'd assigned you radio operators, they assigned you mechanical people, people that were gunners and so forth.
Then we went to Idaho.
And a B-24 crew is what, 10 people?
Yeah.
And then in Idaho, that was mostly for gunnery training and formation training and things like that.
But it's great for me because I had relatives in Idaho.
That's where I was born.
Yeah, you were back home.
So I thoroughly enjoyed that as we got to it.
But that's where you put together a team, and it's amazing how that team stays together.
at least during the war.
You lose them after the war, but they see a real responsibility.
So when you finally got over to Europe, into England, where were you stationed at?
Well, we were stationed at a little place called Wendling.
And the Eighth Air Force, as you say, had I don't know how many planes.
Well, later on,
We joined them, they had a thousand planes they put up.
Real quick, isn't Windling somewhat north of London?
Yeah, about 50 miles north of London.
A small village and of course all that around there.
We went in and built about 25 or 30 air bases.
And one of the advantages of that East Anglia position in Britain, which is right above London,
is that you can do all your maneuvers and getting together and everything over the North Sea.
So you don't then get in any trouble, you might say, that you can't handle if you get in the North Sea, which is not the thing to try because it wouldn't last long.
So really what they put together then was a very efficient program
And I look back on it and wonder, our particular wing there had three squadrons.
Each squadron would have 10 or more planes, and there'd be three of those wings in each part
And you could see before you got through, they could mount some mighty devastating things from that.
Of course, we didn't have the atomic bomb or anything else, but we could play a pretty heavy load on that area.
We've got some pictures that you were
nice enough to loan us.
And some of them are even, you and your wife, I believe, went back to England to see that old airfield and a monument.
And I think we've got some pictures of that along with, there we go.
And now that is a sharp looking service man out there.
That's younger on that, Kyle.
Where was this photo?
Was this your official?
Oh, that must have been when we were there at Fort Worth at the Carsville base out there.
You're a handsome looking soldier.
And this is just before we left to go to England.
We had come back from Idaho and we were at Topeka, Kansas of all places.
Now, is that actually your 24 that you're sitting in front of?
No, that was just one that had to be parked in the field.
One that had to be parked there, okay.
But that is your crew.
And where are you at in that picture?
Well, over here, squatted on the right.
Oh, okay.
Down, you're squatting down.
The center was Snow Hill, my co-pilot.
And to the left was Bernstein, the navigator.
And so you can look at a place like that and you just count off with the word.
Wow.
That's really great.
And unfortunately, with the exception of one or two, that's about all.
That's all that's left.
Where was this picture taken?
Oh, that was back in Michigan, where her mother had a lot of roses there by her milk house.
And that was during the time when I had a little leaves and so forth.
OK.
And you can imagine how they felt when they got a telegram that morning that said that they'd been in a car accident, a plane accident.
And of course, then the question was, are you still alive?
And you know, at that time, the person that was handling the telegraph and so forth to show you how people pulled together, he told mother before he told her what had happened.
He said, this is going to be all right.
And you know they went out of their way to kind of help the people back home as to what might happen.
I can understand that.
Let's go back to the pictures.
I believe now we're going to start looking.
This is the monument.
Yes.
After we left and abandoned that base, which is several years after the war was over, then all the veterans got together and put the money together to have a
recognition of what the people were there.
See, there were 760 people that lost their lives out of that base alone.
Wow.
Just that one airport.
Now, were those Americans or was that also RAF?
No, just Americans.
Just Americans.
Uh-huh.
But you stop and think of all the loss that you have of people and it's unbelievable.
It's always nice to have that monument there at Wendling and it was poised right at the end of the runway where we used to take off.
Wow.
And now the runway was farmed, actually, and lost.
We have a picture of one of the old runways, I believe.
And consequently, this was what it looked like now after we had gone many a plane about that particular deal.
If that runway could talk, more or less, I guess, yeah.
Oh, it could.
It surely could.
Good and bad.
Yeah, exactly.
See, when we took off with one of those loaded planes,
We had about 2,000 gallons of petrol, high octane gas.
We had about three tons of bombs.
Those were 500 pound bombs, weren't they, I think?
Yeah.
And then we had all the ammunition for each one of the people there.
And several other things, too.
So when a plane took off, they had to have pretty good structure to be able to make the takeoff that they wanted.
Oh, absolutely.
Okay, and this looks like an old Quonset hut.
Was this basically your barracks back then?
It probably was, or it might have been one where we had our briefings before we left.
And the briefings, when you started out that morning, you had no idea where you were going to bomb.
Right.
But then when you got in it, they had a ribbon that started with our base and might go clear out to the other end.
And that was the one that you were going to take out that particular day.
And I'll never forget the time I walked in and one of them went to Berlin, right straight over the top of that.
So you didn't know before the takeoff started where you were going to go.
Right.
And you could operate from then.
Oh, now here we go.
That is a B-24, is it not?
Well, you know, the 24 took a lot of bad feelings during the war, but they were a pretty good ship.
They could do one thing that others couldn't, mass production.
Right.
And you see in Long Beach, California, at Fort Worth, Texas, and at the Willow Run in Detroit, they were turning them out almost every hour.
Wow.
And so really, the thing that this plane could do would be do mass production, and they had a lot of them that went out to all the phases of war.
Right.
And this is the front end of the 24 there at Duxon at the museum.
And they now have a full plane at that time.
They only had a part of the nose pain.
That's got to be a special feeling to stand there and look at that nose section there and put your hand on it and know that it basically formed a part of history.
And one of the interesting things, we had a meeting of the veterans of the 8th Air Force there at Fort Worth and went out to the
to the airstrip out there at Carswell, and there were planes stacked up just like they were and just in the same position they were as when we were flying them out.
That had to raise the hair on the back of your neck a little bit.
That made you think of all the time that it's been.
I can imagine.
What is this picture?
There at Duckford, they have in this museum, air museum, they have on the panels the names of everybody that was lost.
Much like the Vietnam War.
And that's all of the North Sea groups, you might say.
And they have nearly 7,000 that actually had lost their lives on that.
And I believe here in this picture, you're actually finding one of your old comrades.
So I wanted to find a couple of the old ones, and my niece was with me.
And I said, see if you can find Bill Aker.
And she said, yeah, he's there on panel number 26.
And she went through a couple others that I knew that had flown and gone down.
And I said, give me Bob Johnson.
And she said, well, there's a whole batch of Robert Johnsons.
I said, look for Robert H. Johnson.
And she said, yeah, there it is.
Sure enough, it was there.
And he was a real close friend of mine while I was over there.
And he was lost over the North Sea in bad weather.
And so it was kind of interesting to me to see his name up there at that particular time.
What about some of your missions?
You went through, what, 23 missions?
And all missions, every single one is a little bit different.
Some of them are kind of easy, some of them are kind of hard.
But you've had some pretty harrowing type missions.
And you often wonder why they picked a mission as you start.
But really, the two things that they wanted the 8th Air Force to do, they wanted them to cut their supply routes.
to take out their transportation for them, also to take out anything connected with lubricant oil.
And so what they did is concentrate their groups to fight over things that would give the biggest loss of those.
So things like Magdeburg, which is east of Berlin, we bombed that thing into eternity.
And others that you could find that they would pick out
But what they did, of course, was almost paralyzed.
And one of the missions we took, while the Battle of the Bulge was going on, they wanted to try to, again, control the movement of the German troops.
And so they sent us to this town of Aureiler.
And the reason for that was this was a main trail, a rail trunk to get flies over to where the Germans were fighting us.
And it was up against the bank there.
And the idea was that we would drop them and see if we could collapse that bank clear along there.
Or if we missed that, we could knock the rail out and so forth.
Well, I think that they had about every 88 cannon in the German army aimed at us.
I've never seen flack like that.
Every plane in our group was hit.
But fortunately, none of them went down.
But I think that was the heaviest flack that I ever saw while I was there.
But it showed you
how air power could really stop and protect our own troops by that sort of thing.
Right.
Was there any other mission that anything really stands out in your mind?
Oh, there's a whole host of them that kind of come back to you and so forth.
I guess the one that was closest to me was one that happened over Dortmund, which is in the rural area of Germany.
And that was a big area for storage of oil and so forth and so on.
And we started out that morning, they usually would give us a short lunch to start off with.
We might not have anything else.
But I was sitting by a fellow, Joe Shuster, and another fellow by the name of Rob.
And one of them was going to be in the formation that we had there, and I was a little
up front because I thought that I had more positions than he did and consequently I should be flying spark.
Actually what happened was in the formation of the plane, you have the three planes up there and then three below them.
And the one below them we call the slot.
And that's where they took the best flying for the leader of that part of a formation and so forth.
So we got over the drop and so forth.
And all of a sudden, I looked up, and Schuster was on one side, and the other fellow was on the other back behind him.
And Schuster was plowing ahead, and his propeller went right through the wings of the flamed head and scattered it, just shredded the other wing.
And, of course, both of them just quit.
And I remember that there was debris all around, and we pulled up and got out of there to avoid it.
But you could see when they went down, our crew thought that two or three chutes came out, and apparently only a couple mated.
So what you see in the morning then is gone by evening.
And that's one thing about the air end of it.
they're gone, and consequently, they're out of business at that time.
So that was quite a deal for me.
I had wanted to be in Schuster's place, and it was a good thing that I was where I was, or I wouldn't have been on them.
So those things happen all during the war.
We've only got two or three minutes left.
Tell us a little bit about your family.
About your family.
Oh, well, while I was getting my wings there at Aldous Air Base in Oklahoma,
Down the road about 30 miles was a young co-ed that was going to college.
But we didn't meet for eight more years.
Or six more years.
So then we've had three children and we have five grandchildren and one great-grandchildren.
But that was sure funny that you would differentiate and still come back.
I thought of that.
And all your children now, are they here in Texas?
No, they're all up in Kansas.
All our kids wound up in Kansas for some reason.
And they've left Aggieland and are up there.
Nothing wrong with that.
Kansas is a great place.
But it's wonderful to have a family, and I'm sure that a lot of the fellows did.
Absolutely.
Well, we've just got a couple of minutes left.
Any last things you can think of that you'd like to tell the viewers?
No, I think like the other people from GIs on up, we don't consider ourselves heroes.
So many things can happen.
So many things are not planned for.
But they do have a strong feeling for each other.
And in a crew that we had, they definitely had, because they helped me even fly it out of a French field one time when we landed there.
Oh, that's right, when you basically ran out of gas.
But still, I think that was one of the finest things that showed that you could really be in lockstep and you'd be in the same motive and do the same thing.
And that happened to the boys in Iraq and everywhere else.
And we have great feelings for them.
Well, thank you much for being here with us today.
Well, I'm glad to be here.
Thank you.
Thanks for what you do.
No, thank you.
Our pleasure, believe me.
Bill Pope was a part of the 8th Army Air Corps, one of the most storied groups of the war in Europe.
He flew 23 missions and a B-24 bomber into the heart of Germany.
Just too shy of the required 25 missions, they were expected to fly before they could go home.
Then, just like that, the war in Europe was over, and our brave soldiers were coming home.
We salute Bill Pope for his unwavering spirit, his dedication, and duty to country.